---
layout: post
title: "Advent of Code 2022: Day 3"
tags: aoc aoc2022
---

## Day 3: Rucksack Reorganization

_The problem statement for day 3 can be found [here](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/3)._

_My solution for day 3 can be found [here](https://github.com/filbertphang/aoc2022/tree/main/day03)._

**Difficulty Rating: Easy**

Let $n$ refer to the number of rucksacks.
Let $m$ refer to the number of items stored in the largest rucksack.

### Part 1

Part 1 requires us to find the sum of priorities of the item types that appear in both compartments in each rucksack.

The simple idea would be to look at the set of items used in both compartments of each rucksack and take the intersection of those sets. An integer or boolean array will suffice for keeping track of the items used in each compartment.

Converting both compartments to the set takes $O(m)$ time. Finding the intersection takes $O(1)$ time, since we just need to iterate over all the 52 items to find the one item that is used in both rucksacks. We repeat the above for $n$ rucksacks. Hence, the total runtime is $O(mn)$, and uses $O(1)$ additional space (since there are a constant number of items).

### Part 2

Part 2 requires us to find the sum of priorities of the item types that are carried by each group of elves.

Similarly to part 1, we need to find the set of items used in each of the 3 rucksacks, then find the intersection of those 3 sets. The total runtime is still $O(mn)$ and the solution still uses $O(1)$ additional space.
