---
layout: post
title: "Advent of Code 2022: Day 1"
tags: aoc aoc2022
---

## Day 1: Calorie Counting

_The problem statement for day 1 can be found [here](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/1)._

_My solution for day 1 can be found [here](https://github.com/filbertphang/aoc2022/tree/main/day01)._

**Difficulty Rating: Easy**

Let $n$ refer to the number of **elves** in the input.

---

### Part 1

Part 1 requires us to find the elf carrying the most calories.

One solution would be to store the calories carried by each elf in an array, then compute the maximum value of that array. This solution would run in $O(n)$ time and $O(n)$ space.

A better solution would be to have a variable that keeps track of the current maximum number of calories carried by any elf. As we process the input, we update this variable if the current elf is carrying more that number of calories. We no longer need to store the calories carried by all elves, so this solution would run in $O(n)$ time and $O(1)$ space.

---

### Part 2

Part 2 requires us to find the top 3 elves carrying the most calories.

A naive solution would be to store the calories carried by each elf in an array, then sort the array in ascending order and return the last 3 elements of the sorted array. This solution would run in $O(n log n)$ time and $O(n)$ space, assuming an efficient sort is used.

A better solution would be to have a **min priority queue** that keeps track of the top 3 largest calorie values carried by any elf currently. As we process the input, we check if the minimum element in the PQ is smaller than the value stored by the current elf, we pop the minimum element and insert the calorie value of the current elf.

**Claim:** The 3 elements in the priority queue after processing the final elf are the 3 largest calorie values across all elves.

**Proof:** The proof will make use of the invariant that after processing an elf, the priority queue will always store the 3 largest calorie values of all the elves processed before and including that elf.

- **Initialization:** We initialize the priority queue with the calorie count of the first 3 elves processed. Since we have only processed 3 elves up to this point, those calorie values are trivially the 3 largest calorie values we have seen thus far.

- **Maintenance:** After processing an elf, we have 2 cases:

  1. This elf's calorie count is one of top 3 largest we have seen thus far
     - Since this calorie value is not in the priority queue yet, it must be larger than the smallest of the 3 values in the PQ. Hence, we replace the minimum value in the PQ with the current calorie count.
     - Then the 3 values in the PQ are now the 3 largest.
  2. This elf's calorie count is NOT one of the top 3 largest we have seen thus far.
     - Then the 3 values in the PQ are still the 3 largest.

  Hence, after processing an elf, the 3 values in the PQ are still the 3 largest values of all the elves processed up to that point.

- **Termination:** There are only a $n$ elves in the input, and we process them one at a time. Hence, the algorithm will eventually terminate.

Hence, the algorithm is correct. Since the priority queue always holds 3 elements, all operations involving the PQ take a constant amount of time. Thus, this solution runs in $O(n)$ time and $O(n)$ space.

An alternative solution would be to use **Quick Select** to find the 4th largest element in the array, then **Partition** using that element as the pivot. The 3 elements in the right side of that partition would contain the 3 largest calorie values across all elves. This solution also runs in $O(n)$ time and $O(n)$ space.
