---
layout: post
title: "Advent of Code 2022: Day 4"
tags: aoc aoc2022
---

## Day 4: Camp Cleanup

_The problem statement for day 4 can be found [here](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/4)._

_My solution for day 4 can be found [here](https://github.com/filbertphang/aoc2022/tree/main/day04)._

**Difficulty Rating: Easy**

Let $n$ refer to the number of pairs of elves.

### Part 1

Part 1 requires us to find the number of pairs of elves that has one assignment range fully overlapping the other.

Let us consider a pair of elves A and B, with ranges $[a_s, a_e]$ and $[b_s, b_e]$ respectively.

Observe that for A's range to fully contain B's range, we must have $a_s \le b_s$ AND $a_e \ge b_e$, i.e. A's range must start before or equal to B's range, and must end after or equal to B's range.

This calculation can be done in $O(1)$ time for each pair. Since we have $n$ pairs, total runtime is $O(n)$ with $O(1)$ additional space used.

### Part 2

Part 2 requires us to find the number of pairs of elves that has some overlap between their assignment ranges.

Similar to part 1, we can formulate some condition for overlapping ranges. Observe that for A's range to overlap with B's range, we have 2 cases:

- **Case 1: A's range comes before B's range.** Then we have $a_s \le b_s$ AND $a_e \ge b_s$. This is because if B's range starts after A's range ends, then we would not have overlap between their ranges.
- **Case 2: B's range comes before A's range.** Likewise, we have $b_s \le a_s$ AND $b_e \ge a_s$.

Similarly, the above can be computed in $O(1)$ time for each pair. Since we have $n$ pairs, total runtime is $O(n)$ with $O(1)$ additional space used.
